 Catching the Big One | U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service Toggle navigation Utility (Top) navigation Passes Permits Duck Stamps Report a Crime Experience America Forward Back Experience America " class="we-megamenu-nolink">Plan Your Visit Forward Back Activities Recreation Pass Events Volunteer " class="we-megamenu-nolink">Popular Activities Forward Back All Activities Fishing Hunting Find a Location Near You 570 national wildlife refuges, 70 fish hatcheries, and 20 million acres of wilderness Explore all locations Places to Go Forward Back Places to Go " class="we-megamenu-nolink">Our Locations Forward Back Wildlife Refuges Fish Hatcheries Rivers Wilderness All Locations " class="we-megamenu-nolink">Featured Locations Forward Back Rocky Mountain Arsenal National Wildlife Refuge Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge Experience Our Locations Explore beyond the locations and begin experiencing what the United States Fish and Wildlife Service Experience America Species Forward Back Species " class="we-megamenu-nolink">About Species Forward Back Endangered Species Invasive Species Injurious Species Species Management Find Species " class="we-megamenu-nolink">Featured Species Forward Back Gray Wolf Northern Long-eared Bat Find a Species Search for specific species by scientific or common names. Find a Species Learn Forward Back Learn " class="we-megamenu-nolink">Get Help Forward Back Protect wildlife Fight invasive species Restore habitats Ways to get involved Learn to hunt Learn to fish " class="we-megamenu-nolink">Programs and Training Forward Back Education Curriculum and Programs Training at the National Conservation Training Center Injured or Abandoned Wildlife A few things you should know to keep the animal safe and avoid breaking the law. Read more Services Forward Back Services " class="we-megamenu-nolink">Passes & Permits Forward Back Entrance Passes Hunting Licenses Fishing Licenses Special Use Permits Import/Export Permits All Passes & Permits " class="we-megamenu-nolink">For Partners Forward Back Grants and Funding Consultations and Technical Assistance Investigational New Animal Drugs " class="we-megamenu-nolink">For Landowners Forward Back Partners for Fish and Wildlife Fish Stocking Cooperative Agriculture Opportunities Land Management Assistance Our Work Forward Back Our Work " class="we-megamenu-nolink">Our Priorities Forward Back Combating Wildlife Trafficking Fishing Pollinators Protecting Wildlife " class="we-megamenu-nolink">Projects & Initiatives Forward Back Duck Stamps Laws & Regulations Maps, Guides and Resources All Initiatives All Projects Recent News and Stories Check out the latest news and updates Read more Search Search Search Enter the terms you wish to search for. × Catching the Big One Catching the Big One Image Details Stocking Trophy Trout from Erwin National Fish Hatchery Dec 31, 2025 Written By Rebekah Ewing Every year Erwin National Fish Hatchery produces between 16 and 20 million certified disease free Rainbow and Brook trout eggs as part of the National Broodstock Program. One "by-product" of producing these eggs are the thousands of 2.5 pounds or bigger trophy trout that Erwin raises every year. Image Details Rainbow trout swim in their raceways at Erwin National Fish Hatchery, waiting for visitors to feed them. It takes around two years for a trout to become old enough to produce eggs. During this two year period, the staff at Erwin care for these fish, keeping their raceways clean, the fish fed, and monitoring their growth every month. By the two year mark the fish average around 2.5 lbs, and are ready to spawn. Some of these fish are held an additional year to spawn again as three year olds, and have an average weight of over 3.5 lbs. Image Details Facilities Operations Specialist Colt Brewer fills up feed buckets. After spawning ends the fish are stocked across Tennessee, providing anglers with the opportunity to catch trophy trout! The trout are primarily stocked in the cold tailwaters below dams in partnership with the Army Corps of Engineers and the TVA. Some of the fish are stocked locally by Erwin National Fish Hatchery staff in the Watauga and Nolichucky river systems. Other fish are transferred to the Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency to be stocked across the state, or are transferred to the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians, who stock them in tribal waters in western North Carolina. Image Details Trout are stocked in Wilbur Lake, and impoundment on the Watauga River. These trophy trout provide prized fish for anglers to catch, and help boost local economies by making them a fishing destination. Other trophy trout raised at Erwin National Fish Hatchery are stocked at the Johnson City VA Hospital pond, creating fishing opportunities for veterans that live on-site. Additional trout are stocked for children's fishing events, helping to foster an interest in fishing for the next generation. Written By Rebekah Ewing Published Dec 31, 2025 Edited By Tyler Hern Facilities Erwin National Fish Hatchery Latest Stories Wildlife Wonders A Promising Discovery for Mojave Poppy Bees Oct 2, 2026 Nisqually Watershed Festival Oct 2, 2026 Land Management Prescribed Fire Operations Planned for Fall and Winter at Turnbull NWR Oct 2, 2026 Agency Contact Center info@fws.gov Footer Menu - Legal About Us Contact Us Work with Us Policies Office of Civil Rights fws.gov An official website of the Department of the Interior
